Okay, you said that you were working the steam
pumps over at the Big Lump? Big Lump, yeah. And that
was... And at the recluta, I come and work for the
witch mine, they used to call it. Well, I worked
there a little while. Mr. Sam Yokel was the boss,
and he told me, Thomas, I heard that you could work
on the steam pumps, pumps and water coolers. And I
said, yeah. So he gave me the job in the recluta.
Working the steam pumps. So you weren't working
underground? Yeah. The steam pumps were down in
the ground, too. The steam pumps were down in the
ground? Yeah. And I worked on the harvesting
engine, harvesting the coal out of the coal mine. I
see. Like Agostino Garcia. I see. And how did you
get paid? Well, I don't remember. I think it was a
general price, about $2. Okay. Yeah. And how many
hours a day did you work? Worked from 6 until I got to
get up in the morning, fire up the boiler. raise the
steam to let the hand of the workmen go down to the
coal. Worked about nine hours sometimes, 10
hours. Did you prefer running the steam engine to
coal mining? Yeah. You made more money that way,
didn't you? Yeah, and it was not hard as work,
because it was hard on my eyes. When I fired the
boiler, see, that was hot. You think that's why
your eyes are kind of bad? I think so. But they told
me in town, they told me that it was mines with about
200,000 diabetes.
At all the mines, let's see, you worked at the Bogle
mine, the Texas Coal Company mine, the Big Lump
mine, the Witcher mine. Yeah. I worked at the
Worley mine. At the Worley mine. And with all that
experience, did you ever see any accidents? No.
At all those mines, did they take the mules down in
the morning and bring them up? They'd come down in
the morning, bring them out, feed them, give them
some hay and corn. Now, local folk company, they
used to give them some corn down in the corn. They'd
tear some corn down in the hay and would feed them
good. Down inside the mine? Inside the mine. Would
they take them out of the mine every night? They'd
take them out every evening. What kind of mules
were they? Were they big mules? Well, ordinary
mules. Ordinary mules, okay. Some big and some
little. Have you ever owned any land yourself?
Yeah. When did you own it and how did you get it?
Well, I tell you, I bought it in the camp. I bought 30
acres of land with a two-story building. Where did
you save the money to buy the land? I bought it in the
bank. It was on credit. On credit? Paid so much to
pay. I see. And you used the money from working at
the mine to pay off? No, there was no coal mine then.
Yeah, but I landed in 1943, I think it was.
I see. And after my wife died, I sold the land and
moved the house right here in town. So after that, I
sold a house, and that's me without
a house. Did you ever attend, did you attend church
every week?
Did most of the people attend church out there?
Well, I did for my, I mean, right there, yeah. Every
Sunday. They'd walk in? Yeah. Yeah, people live
right here. Some of them got a car, well, they go to
church on that car. Did the Mexican people have
their own church? No. They went to... Most of the
people, the Spanish people, they're Catholics.
And they got a Catholic
church here. I see. Were you glad when the mines
shut down? Well, I was not too glad. You see, that's
the only kind of work that I had done in my life, work
at the coal mines. What did you do when the mines
shut down? Well, just like I told you a while ago, I
went to pick cotton. When it was ready to be picked,
I picked cotton, and then I'd go out and cut wood,
grub. What did the other Spanish people do? What
did the other Spanish people do when the mines shut
down? Well, they did the same thing. Some of them
went to farms. There don't seem to be that many
Spanish people left around Rockdale. No. What
happened to the United States? Well, they all
moved away. You know where they moved and why?
Yeah, some of them moved from Malakoff. Some of
them moved from Rockdale to Malakoff. And from
Malakoff, some of the coal mines played out. And
some of them went to Lorain, Ohio. Some of them in
Indiana. Several places. Some of them, they
transport them back to Mexico. Those that don't
want to go to Mexico, the company would transport
the people. The company would transfer them back?
Yeah. I see. Transported up to, like, Malakoff,
you know, people working there. There was no more
coal mines. There was a lot of Spanish people
there. They sent them back, some of them, to
Mexico. Some of them, they went out of the state of
Texas to work. Uh, do you remember any times when
new miners would come up from Mexico? No. I mean,
uh, how did, uh, how did the Spanish people get here
to work the mines? Well, some of them there was, uh,
farmers, and they went to work in that coal mine,
because they could make a little more money every
day. I see. I was under the impression that the, uh,
coal companies went down to Mexico and brought
Spanish people up here? No, some people, you know,
some of the Spanish people, they had a family here
and had some of them in Mexico. Well, they go to the
head man of the coal mine and ask him to let them have
some money so they could bring in the people from
Mexico. And that's the way it is. But there was a lot
of Mexican people here that they come from Mexico.
Some of them from the other coal mines in the United
States. When did your dad come here from Mexico? He
was from Mexico, yeah. What part of Mexico? From
Guanajuato. Guanajuato. Guanajuato. Do you
remember when he came to Texas?
1889, I think. I see. You were born 1890.
Can you think of any humorous stories that
happened at the mine? Anything that makes you
laugh? You were telling me about that Model T that
fell in the shaft one day. Oh yeah, that was a fella,
you know, they was cutting wood for Mr. Noye. And
they got up one Monday morning, I think they must
have been drinking or something. And they stayed
up, I think, Saturday night, all night, or Sunday
night. And they got up and set up a bottle of tea. You
know, they went down in that gully, you know,
within that branch of it. They went down and come
up, and they lost the road somehow. Was it their
bottle of tea? Yeah.
Well, can you think of anything else you'd like to?
That's all I can think of. Did the Spanish people
seem to be happy here at Tomas? Oh, yeah. Was there
ever any trouble of any sort? Oh, well, sometimes a
little fight. Fish fight, I don't know.
Okay, well, I sure do thank you, Tomas. I
appreciate your patience more than anything
else. Well, that's okay. Like I told you a while
ago, there's nothing I can do to help you go around
there and show them old coal holes.